docs/markdown/reference/materia-manifest.5.md, before:

---
title: MATERIA-MANIFEST
section: 5
header: User Manual
footer: materia 0.3.0
date: September 2025
author: stryan
---

## Name
*materia-manifest* - metadata file for materia repos and components

## Synopsis

`<materia_repo>/MANIFEST.toml`,`<component_directory>/MANIFEST.toml`

## Description

A TOML config file that sits at the root of *materia-repository(5)* or materia component that contains metadata describing the entity.

Manifest files are required for a repository or component to be considered valid. Blank manifest files are allowed.

## Repository manifests

### Options

#### **hosts**

A TOML table containing hosts entries of the following format:

      [Hosts.localhost]
      Components = ["caddy","openldap"]
      Roles = ["base"]

#### **roles**

A TOML table of containing roles entries of the following format:

      [Roles.base]
      Components = ["nagios-agent"]

#### **RoleCommand**

(EXPERIMENTAL) An external command ran on a host to determine what role(s) it has.

#### Remote

A TOML table containing Remote Component entries of the following format:

      [Remote.COMPONENT_LOCAL_NAME]
      URL = "git://github.com/example/component_name"
      Version = "v1" # optional

#### **Snippets**

Experimental

## Example

```
[roles.base]
components = ["nagios-agent"]

[hosts.warden]
components = ["dota_patch_bot"]
roles = ["base"]

[hosts.ivy]
components = ["authelia"]

```

## Component manifests


### Options

#### *Defaults*

Key-value pairs describing default variable/attribute values for a component.

Example: `defaults.containerTag = "latest"`

#### *services*

An array of service definitions, use to describe what systemd services should be started when a component is installed.

```
[[services]]
Service = "SERVICE_NAME.service" # The name of the systemd service
RestartedBy = ["resource"] # List of resources that, if updated by a materia run, should trigger the service to be restarted
ReloadedBy = ["resource"] # List of resources that, if updated by a materia run, should trigger the service to be reloaded
Disabled = false # if true, don't enable or start this service
Static = false # Indicates whether the systemd service is generated by a Quadlet. Usually used for .timer files

```

#### *Scripts*

A list of resources that, despite not ending in `.sh`, should be treated as script resources.

#### *Snippets*

Under construction. Used to indicate custom snippets. See *materia-templates(5)* for more details.

#### *Secrets*

A list of materia attributes that will used in the form of podman secrets. Attributes listed here will be added to the podman secrets vault and are accessible in templates with the related macros.

```
Secrets = ["attribute1"]
```

## Example

`arcade-agent/MANIFEST.toml`

```
[Defaults]
port = "5656"
containerTag = "latest"

[[services]]
Service = "arcade-agent.service"
```

Commit message:

feat: experimental component manifest overrides

docs/markdown/reference/materia-manifest.5.md, after:

---
title: MATERIA-MANIFEST
section: 5
header: User Manual
footer: materia 0.3.0
date: September 2025
author: stryan
---

## Name
*materia-manifest* - metadata file for materia repos and components

## Synopsis

`<materia_repo>/MANIFEST.toml`,`<component_directory>/MANIFEST.toml`

## Description

A TOML config file that sits at the root of *materia-repository(5)* or materia component that contains metadata describing the entity.

Manifest files are required for a repository or component to be considered valid. Blank manifest files are allowed.

## Repository manifests

### Options

#### **hosts**

A TOML table containing hosts entries of the following format:

      [Hosts.localhost]
      Components = ["caddy","openldap"]
      Roles = ["base"]

Can also contain an `Overrides` table that contains keys mapped to component manifests. This can be used to override the MANIFSET.toml included with a component on a per-host basis.

Example:

      [Hosts.localhost]
      Components = ["caddy","openldap"]
      [Hosts.localhost.Overrides.caddy.Defaults]
      port = "80"
      [Hosts.localhost.Overrides.caddy.Services]
      Service = "caddy.service"

#### **roles**

A TOML table of containing roles entries of the following format:

      [Roles.base]
      Components = ["nagios-agent"]

#### **RoleCommand**

(EXPERIMENTAL) An external command ran on a host to determine what role(s) it has.

#### Remote

A TOML table containing Remote Component entries of the following format:

      [Remote.COMPONENT_LOCAL_NAME]
      URL = "git://github.com/example/component_name"
      Version = "v1" # optional

#### **Snippets**

Experimental

## Example

```
[roles.base]
components = ["nagios-agent"]

[hosts.warden]
components = ["dota_patch_bot"]
roles = ["base"]

[hosts.ivy]
components = ["authelia"]

```

## Component manifests


### Options

#### *Defaults*

Key-value pairs describing default variable/attribute values for a component.

Example: `defaults.containerTag = "latest"`

#### *services*

An array of service definitions, use to describe what systemd services should be started when a component is installed.

```
[[services]]
Service = "SERVICE_NAME.service" # The name of the systemd service
RestartedBy = ["resource"] # List of resources that, if updated by a materia run, should trigger the service to be restarted
ReloadedBy = ["resource"] # List of resources that, if updated by a materia run, should trigger the service to be reloaded
Disabled = false # if true, don't enable or start this service
Static = false # Indicates whether the systemd service is generated by a Quadlet. Usually used for .timer files

```

#### *Scripts*

A list of resources that, despite not ending in `.sh`, should be treated as script resources.

#### *Snippets*

Under construction. Used to indicate custom snippets. See *materia-templates(5)* for more details.

#### *Secrets*

A list of materia attributes that will used in the form of podman secrets. Attributes listed here will be added to the podman secrets vault and are accessible in templates with the related macros.

```
Secrets = ["attribute1"]
```

## Example

`arcade-agent/MANIFEST.toml`

```
[Defaults]
port = "5656"
containerTag = "latest"

[[services]]
Service = "arcade-agent.service"
```
