docs/markdown/reference/materia-config-planner.5.md, before:

---
title: MATERIA-CONFIG-PLANNER
section: 5
header: User Manual
footer: materia 0.5.0
date: December 2026
author: stryan
---

## Name
materia-config-planner - Materia planner configuration settings

## Synopsis

`/etc/materia/config.toml`, `$MATERIA_PLANNER_<option-name>`

## Options

Presented in *environmental variable*/**TOML config line option** format.

#### *MATERIA_PLANNER_CLEANUP_QUADLETS*/**cleanup_quadlets**

Removes non-volume Quadlets when their associated resources are removed. Defaults to false.

Example: If a resource `test.network` file is removed, materia will also run a `podman network rm systemd-test` command.

The following quadlet types are supported by this:

- Containers
- Networks
- Images
- Build

#### *MATERIA_PLANNER_CLEANUP_VOLUMES*/**cleanup_volumes**

When removing a `.volume` Quadlet resource, remove the volume from Podman as well. Defaults to false.

This is separate from the above **cleanup_podman** option since volumes container user data. It is recommended to leave this to false or use this in conjunction with the **backupvolumes** option.

#### *MATERIA_PLANNER_BACKUP_VOLUMES*/**backup_volumes**

If an action would delete a Podman volume, create a backup of it first using `podman volume export` and store it in **output_dir**. Defaults to true.

Note, this only occurs if a Podman volume is actually being deleted e.g. `podman volume rm`. This does NOT create a backup if just the Quadlet file is deleted.

#### MATERIA_PLANNER_MIGRATE_VOLUMES/migrate_volumes

(EXPERIMENTAL)

Defaults to `false`.

If a volume quadlet is updated, instead of just updating the Quadlet file perform a data migration. A migration consists of the following steps:

    1. Stop services for the component
    2. Dump the existing volume to a tarball
    3. Delete the existing volume
    4. Update the quadlet
    5. Restart the updated service to create the new volume
    6. Import the old volume tarball into the new volume

Commit message:

feat: dont try to remove in-use quadlets during cleanup

docs/markdown/reference/materia-config-planner.5.md, after:

---
title: MATERIA-CONFIG-PLANNER
section: 5
header: User Manual
footer: materia 0.5.0
date: December 2026
author: stryan
---

## Name
materia-config-planner - Materia planner configuration settings

## Synopsis

`/etc/materia/config.toml`, `$MATERIA_PLANNER_<option-name>`

## Options

Presented in *environmental variable*/**TOML config line option** format.

#### *MATERIA_PLANNER_CLEANUP_QUADLETS*/**cleanup_quadlets**

Removes non-volume Quadlets when their associated resources are removed. Defaults to false.

Example: If a resource `test.network` file is removed, materia will also run a `podman network rm systemd-test` command.

This is done on a best-effort basis. If a resource is in-use by other containers (whether materia managed or otherwise) materia will not attempt to remove it.

The following quadlet types are supported by this:

- Networks
- Images
- Build

#### *MATERIA_PLANNER_CLEANUP_VOLUMES*/**cleanup_volumes**

When removing a `.volume` Quadlet resource, remove the volume from Podman as well. Defaults to false.

This is separate from the above **cleanup_podman** option since volumes container user data. It is recommended to leave this to false or use this in conjunction with the **backupvolumes** option.

#### *MATERIA_PLANNER_BACKUP_VOLUMES*/**backup_volumes**

If an action would delete a Podman volume, create a backup of it first using `podman volume export` and store it in **output_dir**. Defaults to true.

Note, this only occurs if a Podman volume is actually being deleted e.g. `podman volume rm`. This does NOT create a backup if just the Quadlet file is deleted.

#### MATERIA_PLANNER_MIGRATE_VOLUMES/migrate_volumes

(EXPERIMENTAL)

Defaults to `false`.

If a volume quadlet is updated, instead of just updating the Quadlet file perform a data migration. A migration consists of the following steps:

    1. Stop services for the component
    2. Dump the existing volume to a tarball
    3. Delete the existing volume
    4. Update the quadlet
    5. Restart the updated service to create the new volume
    6. Import the old volume tarball into the new volume
