docs/markdown/reference/materia-templates.5.md, before:

---
title: MATERIA-TEMPLATES
section: 5
header: User Manual
footer: materia 0.5.0
date: January 2026
author: stryan
---

## Name
materia-templates - Variables, functions, and snippets accessible within Materia template execution

## Description

Materia uses the standard Go templating engine for executing resources that end in the `.gotmpl` file type.

To access a attribute within a templated resource, use the standard Go Template method of accessing variables: `{{ .containerTag }}` will resolve to the `containerTag` attribute.

Besides normal attributes insertion, Materia also supports **macros** and **snippets**.

## Macros

Macros are privileged functions available to Materia while executing a resource. They are not user-modifiable.

Macros are accessed the same way as any other Go Template function: `{{ macro_name }}`.

### Macro List

#### **m_dataDir component_name**

Reference the components **data directory**. Often used for templating bind mounts

   Example: `Volume={{ m_dataDir "component" }}/config.yaml:/config.yaml` will be templated as `Volume=/var/lib/materia/components/component/config.yaml:/config.yaml`

#### **m_facts fact_name**

Lookup a fact about the host.

   Example: `PublishPort={{ m_facts "interface.tailscale0.ip4.0" }}:{{.port}}:{{.port}}` would template as `PublishPort=<tailscale interface IP address>:<port attribute>:<port attribute>`

#### **m_default attribute value**

Return a attribute's value or the provided value if the attribute is not defined

#### **exists attribute**

Returns true if the attribute is defined, otherwise false

#### **snippet "snippet_name" "argument"**

Special macro, see the Snippets section below

#### **secretEnv "attribute name" "TARGET (OPTIONAL)"**

Access a Materia attribute that is specified as a podman secret in the component manifest. The "attribute name" should be as specified in the `secrets = ["attribute_name"]`. Optionally, provide the target as defined in the Podman manual

#### **secretMount "secret name" "ARGS (OPTIONAL)"**

Same as `secretEnv` but accesses the secret as a file mount. Optionally, provide additional arguments as defined in the Podman manual

## Snippets

Snippets are pre-made blocks of templated text that can be inserted with the `snippet` macro. Some come with materia, while others are defined in a component manifest or Repository manifest.

Snippets are not designed for highly-dynamic text, but can take one value as an argument.

Snippets are an experimental feature

##### Built-in Snippets

**autoUpdate <update_source>**

`Label=io.containers.autoupdate=<update_source>`

Commit message:

first pass on reference docs

docs/markdown/reference/materia-templates.5.md, after:

---
title: MATERIA-TEMPLATES
section: 5
header: User Manual
footer: materia 0.5.0
date: January 2026
author: stryan
---

## Name
materia-templates - Variables, functions, and snippets accessible within Materia template execution

## Description

Materia uses the standard Go templating engine for executing resources that end in the `.gotmpl` file type.

To access a attribute within a templated resource, use the standard Go Template method of accessing variables: `{{ .containerTag }}` will resolve to the `containerTag` attribute.

Besides normal attributes insertion, Materia also supports **macros** and **snippets**.

## Macros

Macros are privileged functions available to Materia while executing a resource. They are not user-modifiable.

Macros are accessed the same way as any other Go Template function: `{{ macro_name }}`.

Macros with arguments should have the arguments passed in quotes.

### Macro List

#### **m_dataDir "component_name"**

Reference the components **data directory**. Often used for templating bind mounts

   Example: `Volume={{ m_dataDir "component" }}/config.yaml:/config.yaml` will be templated as `Volume=/var/lib/materia/components/component/config.yaml:/config.yaml`

#### **m_facts "fact_name"**

Lookup a fact about the host.

The following facts are available:
   `hostname`: Return the hostname of the target host.
   `interface`: Return information about the provided interface.
     `interface.eth0` would return all IP addresses for the interface `eth0`
     `interface.eth0.ip4` or `interface.eth0.ip6` would return all IPv4 or IPv6 addresses for the interface `eth0`.
     `interface.eth0.ip4.0` Would return the first IPv4 address for the interface `eth0`

   Example: `PublishPort={{ m_facts "interface.tailscale0.ip4.0" }}:{{.port}}:{{.port}}` would template as `PublishPort=<tailscale interface IP address>:<port attribute>:<port attribute>`

#### **m_default "attribute" "value"**

Return a attribute's value or the provided value if the attribute is not defined

#### **exists "attribute"**

Returns true if the attribute is defined, otherwise false

#### **snippet "snippet_name" "argument"**

Special macro, see the Snippets section below

#### **secretEnv "attribute name" "TARGET (OPTIONAL)"**

Access a Materia attribute that is specified as a podman secret in the component manifest. The "attribute name" should be as specified in the `secrets = ["attribute_name"]`. Optionally, provide the target as defined in the Podman manual

#### **secretMount "secret name" "ARGS (OPTIONAL)"**

Same as `secretEnv` but accesses the secret as a file mount. Optionally, provide additional arguments as defined in the Podman manual

## Snippets

Snippets are pre-made blocks of templated text that can be inserted with the `snippet` macro. Some come with materia, while others are defined in a component manifest or Repository manifest.

Snippets are not designed for highly-dynamic text, but can take one value as an argument.

Snippets are an experimental feature

##### Built-in Snippets

**autoUpdate <update_source>**

`Label=io.containers.autoupdate=<update_source>`
