docs/markdown/resources.md, before:

# Resources

Resources are the files that actually get installed, removed, or updated by Materia. They exist in the Materia Repository as part of [components](./components.md).

Resources are installed with the same permissions and ownership as the source.

There are several kinds of resources broken up into two categories: Quadlet and Data resources.

## Resource Kinds

Resource kind is determined by file type (with the exception of scripts, which can be defined in a component manifest).

### Quadlet Resources

These resources are installed into the Quadlet directory. Removing them does not remove the created Quadlet (container,volume,etc) on the host unless `cleanup` is enabled.

Container and Pod units will be restarted automatically when their associated files are updated. This behaviour can be controlled with the `NoRestart` component setting.

The following file types are quadlets: `.container`,`.volume`,`.pod`,`.network`,`.build`,`.image` and `.kube`.

### Data Resources

These are installed into the Materia data directory and consist of everything that *isn't* a Quadlet file.

All Data resources are installed to the data directory, but some are installed to other locations as indicated.

By default most Data Resources are considered generic `File` type. The following special exceptions are denoted by their file type:

#### Scripts
Scripts are resources that end in `.sh` OR are manually specified as a script in the Component Manifest.

They are installed to the Scripts directory as well the Data directory. By default this is `/usr/local/bin`.

#### Services
Services are resources that are Systemd unit files. The following types are recognized: `.timer`,`.service`,`.socket`,`.mount`,`.device`,`.automount`,`.device`,`.slice`,`.scope`,`.swap`,`path`, and `.target`.

They are installed the Systemd directory as well as the Data directory. By default this is `/etc/systemd/system`.

#### Component Scripts

(EXPERIMENTAL)

These are special scripts that are run as part of Component installation or Removal.

Their default names are `setup.sh` and `cleanup.sh`. Both must exist and be executable, though they do not have to actually do anything.

These scripts exist as an option to handle any installation or removal tasks that need to be done but can't be encapsulated in a Quadlet or Systemd unit, such as creating users or editing system config files.

## Templating Resources

Resources are treated as plain text by default but can also be customized with [Go Templates](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template).

Resources are denoted as templates with the `.gotmpl` suffix. This suffix will not be considered part of the Resource name. Only the last instance of this will be cut off; `conf.gotmpl.gotmpl` will be treated as a resource named `conf.gotmpl`.

The most common usage of Templates is to interpolate [Attributes](./attributes.md) into them with `{{ .attributeName }}`.

Materia also includes several "macros" to make writing resources easier. A full list can be found in the [reference page](./reference/materia-templates.5.md) but some common ones are:

`{{ m_dataDir "component name" }}` which returns the data directory for the component specified. Useful for referring to config file resources.

`{{ m_default "attribute name" "default" }}` which returns the attribute value if defined or the default value if not.

Commit message:

bump docs, move manifest options to settings table

docs/markdown/resources.md, after:

# Resources

Resources are the files that actually get installed, removed, or updated by Materia. They exist in the Materia Repository as part of [components](./components.md).

Resources are installed with the same permissions and ownership as the source.

There are several kinds of resources broken up into two categories: Quadlet and Data resources.

## Resource Kinds

Resource kind is determined by file type (with the exception of scripts, which can be defined in a component manifest).

### Quadlet Resources

These resources are installed into the Quadlet directory. Removing them does not remove the created Quadlet (container,volume,etc) on the host unless `cleanup` is enabled.

Container and Pod units will be restarted automatically when their associated files are updated. This behaviour can be controlled with the `NoRestart` component setting.

The following file types are quadlets: `.container`,`.volume`,`.pod`,`.network`,`.build`,`.image` and `.kube`.

### Data Resources

These are installed into the Materia data directory and consist of everything that *isn't* a Quadlet file.

All Data resources are installed to the data directory, but some are installed to other locations as indicated.

By default most Data Resources are considered generic `File` type. The following special exceptions are denoted by their file type:

#### Scripts
Scripts are resources that end in `.sh` OR are manually specified as a script in the Component Manifest.

Scripts can be designated as setup scripts or cleanup scripts with the `Settings.SetupScript` and `Settings.CleanupScript` component manifest options, respectively.

They are installed to the Scripts directory as well the Data directory. By default this is `/usr/local/bin`.

#### Services
Services are resources that are Systemd unit files. The following types are recognized: `.timer`,`.service`,`.socket`,`.mount`,`.device`,`.automount`,`.device`,`.slice`,`.scope`,`.swap`,`path`, and `.target`.

They are installed the Systemd directory as well as the Data directory. By default this is `/etc/systemd/system`.


## Templating Resources

Resources are treated as plain text by default but can also be customized with [Go Templates](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template).

Resources are denoted as templates with the `.gotmpl` suffix. This suffix will not be considered part of the Resource name. Only the last instance of this will be cut off; `conf.gotmpl.gotmpl` will be treated as a resource named `conf.gotmpl`.

The most common usage of Templates is to interpolate [Attributes](./attributes.md) into them with `{{ .attributeName }}`.

Materia also includes several "macros" to make writing resources easier. A full list can be found in the [reference page](./reference/materia-templates.5.md) but some common ones are:

`{{ m_dataDir "component name" }}` which returns the data directory for the component specified. Useful for referring to config file resources.

`{{ m_default "attribute name" "default" }}` which returns the attribute value if defined or the default value if not.
